Update release notes from recent release (#5617)
gammapy/gammapy: docs/development/release.rst

How to make a Gammapy release
*****************************

> This page contains step-by-step instructions for how to make a Gammapy release. The general procedure can

Reviewer: I would keep the mention of the astropy release scheme saying that our procedure is inspired by that of astropy and follows similar steps and refer to their doc here.

be broken down into three major steps:

> * Feature freeze: freeze the core package features, a number of weeks before the release

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Feature freeze: freeze the core package features and create a new branch for the release. This is done typically two weeks before the release
```

> * Release candidate: proposed feature release which should be tested, a few weeks before the final release

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Release candidate: proposed feature release which should be tested. This is done typically one week before the final release.
```

> * Final release: a final release for the version of the feature release

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Final release
```

#. Add a new milestone to the GitHub issue tracker for the version ``v<version>.x`` (this will also be used for the
   next bugfix release). Also create a ``backport-v<version>.x`` label.
#. Update your local ``main`` branch to the latest from remote::

    git fetch upstream --tags --prune
    git checkout -B main upstream/main

#. Create a new branch with the name of the version::

    git branch v<version>.x

#. Stay on the ``main`` branch and make a copy and update the ``docs/release-notes/<version>.rst``
#. Commit the changes and push to GitHub main.
#. Update the entry for the feature freeze in the
   `Gammapy release calendar <https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy/wiki/Release-Calendar>`__.

Releasing the first major release candidate
-------------------------------------------

**A few days before the planned release candidate:**

#. Fill the changelog ``docs/release-notes/<version>.rst`` for the version you are about to release.
#. Update the author list manually in the  ``CITATION.cff``.
#. Open a PR including both changes and mark it with the ``backport-v<version>.x`` label.
   Gather feedback from the Gammapy user and dev community and finally merge and backport to the

>    ``v<version>.x`` branch.

Reviewer: Maybe those steps should be moved to the feature freeze. It takes a lot of time to get all feedback on changelog and author list.

Author: I think this time we took longer because we forgot this step at the release candidate stage, right?

Reviewer: no, it was started even before the feature freeze actually...

   * In the ``download/install`` folder, copy a previous environment file file as ``gammapy-1.0rc1-environment.yml``.
   * Adapt the dependency conda env name and versions as required in this file.

#. Switch to the correct branch and update the ``CITATION.cff`` date and version by running the
   ``dev/prepare-release.py`` script::

    git checkout v1.0.x
    python ./dev/prepare-release.py --release v1.0rc1

> #. Push the branch back to GitHub::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Commit and push the branch back to GitHub::
```

    git push upstream v1.0.x

> #. Locally create a new release candidate tag on the ``v1.0``, like ``v1.0rc1`` for Gammapy and push::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Locally create a new release candidate tag on the ``v1.0.x`` branch, like ``v1.0rc1`` for Gammapy and push::
```

Author: The `x` would imply a bug fix release. So I don't think we want to include that here

Reviewer: No, `v1.0.x` or `v1.3.x` is the name of the branch. Maybe we can clarify this.

Reviewer: Implicitly v1.0 is v1.0.0, so the x is always there. 
In their latest APE, astropy decided to use X.0.0 for the major release as it is clearer this way. For now, we don't

Author: Ahh okay, I follow now. 
Thanks for the clarification

    git tag -s v1.0rc1 -m "Tagging v1.0rc1"

>     git push upstream v1.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    git push upstream v1.0.x
```

#. Once the tag is pushed, the docs build and upload to `PyPi <https://pypi.org/>`__ should be triggered automatically.
#. Check the ``Actions`` on `gammapy repo <https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy>`__ to check that the necessary
   actions have started.

#. Once the docs build if successful find the ``tutorials_jupyter.zip`` file for the release candidate in the
   `gammapy-docs repo <https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy-docs>`__ and adapt the ``download/index.json`` to point to it.
#. Update the entry for the release candidate in the
   `Gammapy release calendar <https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy/wiki/Release-Calendar>`__.
#. Create a testing page like
   `Gammapy v1.0rc testing <https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy/wiki/Gammapy-v1.0rc-testing>`__.
#. Advertise the release candidate and motivate developers and users to report test fails and bugs and list them
   on the page created before.

Releasing the final version of the major release
------------------------------------------------

> #. Create a new release tag in the `gammapy-data repo <https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy-data>`__, like ``v1.0``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Create a new tag in the `gammapy-data repo <https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy-data>`__, like ``v1.0``
```

   or ``v1.1``.

#. In the `gammapy-webpage repo <https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy-webpage>`__:

   * In the ``download/install`` folder, copy a previous environment file file as ``gammapy-1.0-environment.yml``.
   * Adapt the dependency conda env name and versions as required in this file. Make sure to move ``gammapy=1.0``
     into the dependencies list.
   * Update the datasets entry in the ``download/index.json`` to point to this new release tag. Also update the
     notebook entry, typically the link extensions are the same between versions.

#. Locally create a new release tag like ``v1.0`` for Gammapy and push::

    git tag -s v1.0 -m "Tagging v1.0"

>     git push upstream v1.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    git push upstream v1.0.x
```

#. In the `gammapy-docs repo <https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy-docs>`__:

>    * Kill the ``dev-docs`` build.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * Kill the possible ``dev-docs`` build actions as they might interfere with the ``release`` docs build.
```

    git tag -s v1.0rc1 -m "Tagging v1.0rc1"
    git push upstream v1.0.x

#. Once the tag is pushed, the docs build and upload to `PyPi <https://pypi.org/>`__ should be triggered automatically.
#. Check the ``Actions`` on `gammapy repo <https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy>`__ to check that the necessary
   actions have started.
#. Once the docs build is successful find the ``tutorials_jupyter.zip`` file for the release candidate in the
   `gammapy-docs repo <https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy-docs>`__ and adapt the ``download/index.json`` to point to it.
#. Update the entry for the release candidate in the
   `Gammapy release calendar <https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy/wiki/Release-Calendar>`__.
#. Create a testing page like
   `Gammapy v1.0rc testing <https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy/wiki/Gammapy-v1.0rc-testing>`__.
#. Advertise the release candidate and motivate developers and users to report test fails and bugs and list them
   on the page created before.

Releasing the final version of the major release
------------------------------------------------

#. Create a new tag in the `gammapy-data repo <https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy-data>`__, like ``v1.0``

>    or ``v1.1``.

Reviewer 2: Should we add here the detailed instructions?

Author: It is simply adding a new tag here: https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy-data/tags :)

     notebook entry, typically the link extensions are the same between versions.

#. Locally create a new release tag like ``v1.0`` for Gammapy and push::

    git tag -s v1.0 -m "Tagging v1.0"
    git push upstream v1.0.x

#. In the `gammapy-docs repo <https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy-docs>`__:

   * Kill the possible ``dev-docs`` build actions as they might interfere with the ``release`` docs build.
   * Wait for the triggered ``release`` docs build to finish.
   * Edit ``docs/stable/switcher.json`` to add the new version.

#. In the `gammapy-webpage repo <https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy-webpage>`__:

   * Find the ``tutorials_jupyter.zip`` file for the new release in the
     `gammapy-docs repo <https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy-docs>`__ and confirm the link in
     ``download/index.json`` is correct.
   * Mention the release on the front page and on the news page. Both the ``news.html`` and ``index.html`` should be
     edited at this step to include the correct version numbers.

#. Update the entry for the actual release in the
   `Gammapy release calendar <https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy/wiki/Release-Calendar>`__.

#. Finally:

>    * Update the Gammapy conda-forge package at https://github.com/conda-forge/gammapy-feedstock.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * The Gammapy conda-forge package at https://github.com/conda-forge/gammapy-feedstock should be automatically updated within hours and a PR opened. Check that this is the case and if not, perform the manual update of the recipe meta.yaml on your gammapy-feedstock fork and open the PR. Finally, when all tests for all distributions successfully ran, merge the PR.   
```

    * https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/astropy-dev
    * CTAO AS WG list (cta-wg-as@cta-observatory.org)
    * hess-forum list (hess-forum@lsw.uni-heidelberg.de)
#. Make sure the release milestone and issue is closed on GitHub.
#. Update these release notes with any useful infos / steps that you learned
   while making the release (ideally try to script / automate the task or check,
   e.g. as a ``make release-check-xyz`` target).
#. Update the version numbers in `gammapy-webpage repo <https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy-webpage>`__

>    ``master`` branch to allow the Binder ``Dockerfile`` to be updated.

Author: Do we still wish to support this?
Note: it is not working for v1.2 or v1.3 currently

Reviewer: See #5623.

   `gammapy-webpage repo <https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy-webpage>`__. The ``datasets`` entry should point to last
   stable version, like ``v1.0`` or ``v1.1``. We do not provide bug-fix release for data.

> #. Follow the `Astropy bug fix release instructions <https://docs.astropy.org/en/latest/development/maintainers/releasing.html#maintaining-bug-fix-releases>`__.

Reviewer: Probably we could expand here as well.

Author: Yes I agree. Do we know the exact steps we take, or do we need to wait until we do a bug release?

Reviewer: We can wait for now
